README.md, before:

# [next-safe-action](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action)

> `next-safe-action` is a library that takes full advantage of the latest and greatest Next.js, React and TypeScript features to let you define typesafe actions on the server and call them from Client Components. 

## Features
- ✅ Pretty simple
- ✅ End to end type safety
- ✅ Input validation
- ✅ Direct or hook usage from client  
- ✅ Authenticated actions

## Requirements

Next.js >= 13.3.0 and >= TypeScript 5.0.

## Installation

```sh
npm i next-safe-action zod
```

## Code example ⬇️

### Check out [this example repository](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action-example) to see a basic implementation of this library and to experiment a bit with it.

---

## Project configuration

In `next.config.js` (since Next.js 13.4.0):

```ts
/** @type {import('next').NextConfig} */
const nextConfig = {
  experimental: {
    serverActions: true, // add this
  },
};

module.exports = nextConfig;
```

Then, you need to create the safe action client:

```typescript
// src/lib/safe-action.ts

import { createSafeActionClient } from "next-safe-action";

export const action = createSafeActionClient();
```

Now create a file for an action:

```typescript
// src/app/login-action.ts

"use server"; // don't forget to add this

import { z } from "zod";
import { action } from "~/lib/safe-action";

// This is used to validate input from client.
const input = z.object({
  username: z.string().min(3).max(10),
  password: z.string().min(8).max(100),
});

// This is how a safe action is created.
// Since we provided a Zod input validator to the function, we're sure
// that data that comes in is type safe and validated.
// The second argument of this function is an async function that receives
// parsed input, and defines what happens on the server when the action is
// called from the client.
// In short, this is your backend code. It never runs on the client.
export const loginUser = action({ input }, async ({ username, password }) => {
    if (username === "johndoe") {
      return {
        error: {
          reason: "user_suspended",
        },
      };
    }

    if (username === "user" && password === "password") {
      return {
        success: true,
      };
    }

    return {
      error: {
        reason: "incorrect_credentials",
      },
    };
  }
);
```

`action` returns a new function (in this case `loginUser`). To make it actually work, we must pass the action to a Client Component as a prop, otherwise Server Component functions (e.g. `cookies()` or `headers()`) wouldn't work in the server action body (defined above).

```tsx
// src/app/page.tsx

import Login from "./login";
import { loginUser } from "./login-action";

export default function Home() {
  return (
    {/* here we pass the safe action to the Client Component */}
    <Login loginUser={loginUser} />
  );
}
```

---

There are two ways to call safe actions from the client:

## 1. The direct way

```tsx
"use client"; // this is a Client Component

import type { loginUser } from "./login-action";

type Props = {
  loginUser: typeof loginUser; // infer typings with `typeof`
}

export default function Login({ loginUser }: Props) {
  return (
    <button
      onClick={async () => {
        // Typesafe action called from client.
        const res = await loginUser({ username: "user", password: "password" });

        // Res keys.
        const { data, validationError, serverError } = res;
      }}>
      Log in
    </button>
  );
}
```

On the client you get back a typesafe response object, with three optional keys:

- `data`: if action runs without issues, you get what you returned in the server action body.

- `validationError`: if an invalid input object (parsed by Zod via input validator) is passed from the client when calling the action, invalid fields will populate this key, in the form of:

```json
{
  "validationError": {
    "fieldName": ["issue"],
  }
}
```

- `serverError`: if an unexpected error occurs in the server action body, it will be caught, and the client will only get back a `serverError` response. By default, the server error will be logged via `console.error`, but [this is configurable](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action#custom-server-error-logging).

## 2. The hook way

Another way to mutate data from client is by using the `useAction` hook. This is useful when you need global access to the action state in the Client Component.

Here's how it works:

```tsx
"use client"; // this is a Client Component

import { useAction } from "next-safe-action/hook";
import { loginUser } from "./login-action";

type Props = {
  loginUser: typeof loginUser;
};

export default function Login({ loginUser }: Props) {
  // Safe action (`loginUser`) passed to `useAction` hook.
  const { execute, isExecuting, res } = useAction(loginUser);

  return (
    <>
      <button
        onClick={async () => {
          // Typesafe action called from client.
          await execute({ username: "user", password: "password" });
        }}>
        Log in
      </button>
      <p>Is executing: {JSON.stringify(isExecuting)}</p>
      <p>Res: {JSON.stringify(res)}</p>
    </>
  );
}
```

The `useAction` hook returns an object with three keys:

- `execute`: a caller for the safe action you provided as argument to the hook. Here you pass your typesafe `input`, the same way you do when using safe action the non-hooky way.
- `isExecuting`: a `boolean` that is true while the `execute` function is mutating data.
- `res`: when `execute` finished mutating data, the response object. Otherwise it is `null`. It has the same three optional keys as the one above (`data`, `validationError`, `serverError`), plus one: `fetchError`. This additional optional key is populated when communication with the server fails for some reason.

Image example:

![Hook typesafe response](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action/main/assets/hook-typesafe-client-response.png)


## Authenticated action

The library also supports creating protected actions, that will return a `serverError` back if user is not authenticated. You need to make some changes to the above code in order to use them.

First, when creating the safe action client, you **must** provide an `async function` called `getAuthData` as an option. You can return anything you want from here. If you find out that the user is not authenticated, you can safely throw an error in this function. It will be caught, and the client will receive a `serverError` response.

```typescript
// src/lib/safe-action.ts

import { createSafeActionClient } from "next-safe-action";

export const action = createSafeActionClient({
  // Here you can use functions such as `cookies()` or `headers()`
  // from next/headers, or utilities like `getServerSession()` from NextAuth.
  getAuthData: async () => {
    const session = true;

    if (!session) {
      throw new Error("user is not authenticated!");
    }

    return {
      userId: "coolest_user_id",
    };
  },
});
```

Then, you can provide a `withAuth: true` option to the safe action you're creating:

```typescript
"use server"; // don't forget to add this

import { z } from "zod";
import { action } from "~/lib/safe-action";

...

// [1] For protected actions, you need to provide `withAuth: true` here.
// [2] Then, you'll have access to the auth object, in this case it's just
// `{ userId }`, which comes from the return type of the `getAuthData` function
// declared in the previous step.
export const editUser = action({ input, withAuth: true }, // [1]
  async (parsedInput, { userId }) => { // [2]
    console.log(userId); // will output: "coolest_user_id",
    ...
  }
);
```

If you set `withAuth` to `true` in the safe action you're creating, but you forgot to define a `getAuthData` function when creating the client (above step), an error will be thrown when calling the action from client, that results in a `serverError` response for the client.

## Custom server error logging

As you just saw, you can provide a `getAuthData` function to `createSafeActionClient` function.

You can also provide a custom logger function for server errors. By default, they'll be logged via `console.error` (on the server, obviously), but this is configurable:

```typescript
// src/lib/safe-action.ts

import { createSafeActionClient } from "next-safe-action";

export const action = createSafeActionClient({
  // You can also provide an empty function here (if you don't want server error
  // logging), or a Promise. Return type is `void`.
  serverErrorLogFunction: (e) => {
    console.error("CUSTOM ERROR LOG FUNCTION:", e);
  },
});
```

## Alternatives

- [Zact](https://github.com/pingdotgg/zact) by [Ping](https://github.com/pingdotgg)

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action/blob/main/LICENSE).

Commit message:

feat(hook): use React's `useTransition` hook to manage mutation

README.md, after:

# [next-safe-action](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action)

> `next-safe-action` is a library that takes full advantage of the latest and greatest Next.js, React and TypeScript features to let you define typesafe actions on the server and call them from Client Components. 

## Features
- ✅ Pretty simple
- ✅ End to end type safety
- ✅ Input validation
- ✅ Direct or hook usage from client  
- ✅ Authenticated actions

## Requirements

Next.js >= 13.3.0 and >= TypeScript 5.0.

## Installation

```sh
npm i next-safe-action zod
```

## Code example ⬇️

### Check out [this example repository](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action-example) to see a basic implementation of this library and to experiment a bit with it.

---

## Project configuration

In `next.config.js` (since Next.js 13.4.0):

```ts
/** @type {import('next').NextConfig} */
const nextConfig = {
  experimental: {
    serverActions: true, // add this
  },
};

module.exports = nextConfig;
```

Then, you need to create the safe action client:

```typescript
// src/lib/safe-action.ts

import { createSafeActionClient } from "next-safe-action";

export const action = createSafeActionClient();
```

Now create a file for an action:

```typescript
// src/app/login-action.ts

"use server"; // don't forget to add this

import { z } from "zod";
import { action } from "~/lib/safe-action";

// This is used to validate input from client.
const input = z.object({
  username: z.string().min(3).max(10),
  password: z.string().min(8).max(100),
});

// This is how a safe action is created.
// Since we provided a Zod input validator to the function, we're sure
// that data that comes in is type safe and validated.
// The second argument of this function is an async function that receives
// parsed input, and defines what happens on the server when the action is
// called from the client.
// In short, this is your backend code. It never runs on the client.
export const loginUser = action({ input }, async ({ username, password }) => {
    if (username === "johndoe") {
      return {
        error: {
          reason: "user_suspended",
        },
      };
    }

    if (username === "user" && password === "password") {
      return {
        success: true,
      };
    }

    return {
      error: {
        reason: "incorrect_credentials",
      },
    };
  }
);
```

`action` returns a new function (in this case `loginUser`). To make it actually work, we must pass the action to a Client Component as a prop, otherwise Server Component functions (e.g. `cookies()` or `headers()`) wouldn't work in the server action body (defined above).

```tsx
// src/app/page.tsx

import Login from "./login";
import { loginUser } from "./login-action";

export default function Home() {
  return (
    {/* here we pass the safe action to the Client Component */}
    <Login loginUser={loginUser} />
  );
}
```

---

There are two ways to call safe actions from the client:

## 1. The direct way

```tsx
"use client"; // this is a Client Component

import type { loginUser } from "./login-action";

type Props = {
  loginUser: typeof loginUser; // infer typings with `typeof`
}

export default function Login({ loginUser }: Props) {
  return (
    <button
      onClick={async () => {
        // Typesafe action called from client.
        const res = await loginUser({ username: "user", password: "password" });

        // Res keys.
        const { data, validationError, serverError } = res;
      }}>
      Log in
    </button>
  );
}
```

On the client you get back a typesafe response object, with three optional keys:

- `data`: if action runs without issues, you get what you returned in the server action body.

- `validationError`: if an invalid input object (parsed by Zod via input validator) is passed from the client when calling the action, invalid fields will populate this key, in the form of:

```json
{
  "validationError": {
    "fieldName": ["issue"],
  }
}
```

- `serverError`: if an unexpected error occurs in the server action body, it will be caught, and the client will only get back a `serverError` response. By default, the server error will be logged via `console.error`, but [this is configurable](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action#custom-server-error-logging).

## 2. The hook way

Another way to mutate data from client is by using the `useAction` hook. This is useful when you need global access to the action state in the Client Component.

`useAction` uses React's `useTransition` hook behind the scenes to manage the mutation.

Here's how it works:

```tsx
"use client"; // this is a Client Component

import { useAction } from "next-safe-action/hook";
import { loginUser } from "./login-action";

type Props = {
  loginUser: typeof loginUser;
};

export default function Login({ loginUser }: Props) {
  // Safe action (`loginUser`) passed to `useAction` hook.
  const { execute, isExecuting, res } = useAction(loginUser);

  return (
    <>
      <button
        onClick={async () => {
          // Typesafe action called from client.
          await execute({ username: "user", password: "password" });
        }}>
        Log in
      </button>
      <p>Is executing: {JSON.stringify(isExecuting)}</p>
      <p>Res: {JSON.stringify(res)}</p>
    </>
  );
}
```

The `useAction` hook returns an object with three keys:

- `execute`: a caller for the safe action you provided as argument to the hook. Here you pass your typesafe `input`, the same way you do when using safe action the non-hooky way.
- `isExecuting`: a `boolean` that is true while the `execute` function is mutating data.
- `res`: when `execute` finished mutating data, the response object. Otherwise it is `null`. It has the same three optional keys as the one above (`data`, `validationError`, `serverError`), plus one: `fetchError`. This additional optional key is populated when communication with the server fails for some reason.

Image example:

![Hook typesafe response](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action/main/assets/hook-typesafe-client-response.png)


## Authenticated action

The library also supports creating protected actions, that will return a `serverError` back if user is not authenticated. You need to make some changes to the above code in order to use them.

First, when creating the safe action client, you **must** provide an `async function` called `getAuthData` as an option. You can return anything you want from here. If you find out that the user is not authenticated, you can safely throw an error in this function. It will be caught, and the client will receive a `serverError` response.

```typescript
// src/lib/safe-action.ts

import { createSafeActionClient } from "next-safe-action";

export const action = createSafeActionClient({
  // Here you can use functions such as `cookies()` or `headers()`
  // from next/headers, or utilities like `getServerSession()` from NextAuth.
  getAuthData: async () => {
    const session = true;

    if (!session) {
      throw new Error("user is not authenticated!");
    }

    return {
      userId: "coolest_user_id",
    };
  },
});
```

Then, you can provide a `withAuth: true` option to the safe action you're creating:

```typescript
"use server"; // don't forget to add this

import { z } from "zod";
import { action } from "~/lib/safe-action";

...

// [1] For protected actions, you need to provide `withAuth: true` here.
// [2] Then, you'll have access to the auth object, in this case it's just
// `{ userId }`, which comes from the return type of the `getAuthData` function
// declared in the previous step.
export const editUser = action({ input, withAuth: true }, // [1]
  async (parsedInput, { userId }) => { // [2]
    console.log(userId); // will output: "coolest_user_id",
    ...
  }
);
```

If you set `withAuth` to `true` in the safe action you're creating, but you forgot to define a `getAuthData` function when creating the client (above step), an error will be thrown when calling the action from client, that results in a `serverError` response for the client.

## Custom server error logging

As you just saw, you can provide a `getAuthData` function to `createSafeActionClient` function.

You can also provide a custom logger function for server errors. By default, they'll be logged via `console.error` (on the server, obviously), but this is configurable:

```typescript
// src/lib/safe-action.ts

import { createSafeActionClient } from "next-safe-action";

export const action = createSafeActionClient({
  // You can also provide an empty function here (if you don't want server error
  // logging), or a Promise. Return type is `void`.
  serverErrorLogFunction: (e) => {
    console.error("CUSTOM ERROR LOG FUNCTION:", e);
  },
});
```

## Alternatives

- [Zact](https://github.com/pingdotgg/zact) by [Ping](https://github.com/pingdotgg)

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](https://github.com/TheEdoRan/next-safe-action/blob/main/LICENSE).
